# Mobile Mindset - SeaGL 2022 - Transcript

NOMAD: We're live again!  Well, mostly live.  I'm up- I'm here to introduce Dawn Collett.  Dawn likes to tinker with cloud infrastructure and security; Dawn will be presenting a talk on 'Finding the right tools for your new job'.  Erm, as you can see, Dawn is here, but we will actually be rolling a tape for the talk itself.  If you have questions, please put them in the Matrix room, and they will be answered at the end of the session.  I would like to thank our sponsors, and now: Dawn!

LIVE DAWN: Hi everyone!  Sorry, you don't- er, little bit of a preamble; there will be no slides with this talk, because when I was trying to render the captions in, the editing and captioning workflow completely blew up on me, and I did not have the bandwidth to attempt to do it again.  So, hopefully as a break from watching slides, you will all g- instead get to see about 21 minutes of my face from now; I hope that is satisfactory.  Roll the tape!

RECORDED DAWN: It is really great to be with you all here today at SeaGL in the comfort of your own homes and I am here to talk about the idea of having a mobile mindset; the process of getting yourself ready for your new job.  If you want to follow along with the sources that I used in putting this talk together, you can get out your device and scan the QR code that is up on the slide that's visible now, or go to the GitHub link, and they will take you to a GitHub repository with all of the details that you need.  To begin with, I would like to acknowledge the Wurundjeri people of the Kulin Nation, on whose land this talk was recorded.  This is, and always will be, Aboriginal land.  Their sovereignty was never ceded.  This is probably an audience that doesn't know me, and in more recent times, that's been a bit of a rarity!  So, my name is Dawn.  I do security and cloud platform stuff at a tech consultancy based out of Melbourne, Australia called Innablr.  Outside of work, I am an occasional author and kitchen alchemist - sometimes that ends really well, sometimes it doesn't.  I am also a raging sportsball fan, and - sorry Seattle - I still haven't managed to get a Kraken sweater, so it's Boston Bruins gear again.  I'll get one for SeaGL next year.  So I want to start this story by talking about a friend of mine.  I very often go out out of town to visit my friend.  And, probably about a year and a half ago now, I was complaining to her that I have never been able to cook latkes properly.  Every time I've tried it, has turned into an absolute disaster.  And she said to me 'all right, next time you come around here, we are going to sit down together and we are going to cook latkes'.  So I show up to her place and we've got all the ingredients together, and we're getting everything together, and we are going to cook latkes.  One of the ingredients of latkes is- one of the ingredients in her particular latke recipe is matzo meal.  And we did not have matzo meal, but we did have matzos.  The problem is, getting large flat crackers to something more the consistency of breadcrumbs is not something that one can generally do without some sort of tool.  So we start with a mortar and pestle, and we were able to break some of them into generally smaller bits, but at the end of it what we basically had was slightly smaller crackers.  So looking around, and my friend's kid comes in, and he looks at the mess that we're making of things, and he says 'well, why don't you take the matzah and put them in a blender?'  So we then get out the blender, we stick the bits of the matzo meal which we have successfully made a mess of in the mortar and pestle in the blender, and we attempt to blend them up a bit.  And what we get is a bunch of fine dust, and some slightly smaller - but still too big - pieces of cracker.  So again, we sit down, and we sort of go 'okay, at this point we need to recalibrate again'.  And then we spy the food processor.  So we take the contents of the blender, we pour them into the food processor, we run the food processor for a period, and at the end of it we end up with a reasonable facsimile of matzo meal.  We stick it in the bowl, we cook the latkes, and they were far better than any that I have ever managed to cook before or since.  So, why am I illustrating a talk about mobility and mindsets with a use-case about latkes?  Well, the answer to that is because tools are not a panacea in the IT industry.  A lot of people have one of two views.  They either have the view that it doesn't matter what sort of tool you use, it will be perfectly fine for the job; or they have the view that there is only one right tool for the job.  They think and function in absolutes.  There are certain people that I have met in my time in the IT industry who, no matter which job and which scenario you put them in, would end up using the same CI/CD tool every time.  But the answer here is somewhere in between.  The answer is that tools are not always the solution, but there are times where it does matter what sort of tool you use.  And this is where it kind of starts to intersect with the matter of mindset.  Because if you are here today at SeaGL, you come from a perspective that not a lot of people in the IT industry have, and that is the perspective of someone who has an interest in open source software beyond just pulling packages onto your machine and going with it.  If you're here today, you have an interest, or an understanding, beyond that of the average person in the IT industry. And some of those skills that you pick up around open-source communities actually end up transferring quite well when you're trying to work out how to deal with scenarios in a new job.  On the other hand, when we're looking at these sorts of new job scenarios, one thing that we'll quite often find is that because we are the outliers, we'll often be walking into an environment where open-source isn't necessarily valued to a great degree, or people aren't too sure of the value that our experiences in open-source communities and with open-source software will bring to the table.  And that is very much about a paradigm shift.  People move jobs in technology all the time.  I've known people who started their career as DBAs and ended up working in what we now call DevOps.  I've known people who are very involved in the early history of open-source, and ended up running platform teams.  You know, people who were involved in the days when `bash` was cutting edge who've ended up running platform teams which are largely built on commercial software, but kind of pull some of these ideals and thought processes from the open-source software world as it's evolved.  Another group of people whom there are probably quite a lot of here is people who have changed career into tech, or people who have gone in and out of tech.  Some of the best people that I've worked with in technical circles are the ones who have - if not extensive, at least varied life experience outside the tech industry.  If all that you've ever done in your life is gone and got a computer science degree, then you're going to see things with one particular paradigm that people who've been in open-source circles, and people who've been in and out of the industry altogether, are not going to see.  So when you get into a new job, one of the things that you will have to deal with is the matter of uncertainty.  It does not matter how well you plan your new job, and it does not matter how well the people at your new job plan their projects.  Every workplace, every team, and every scenario involves some degree of uncertainty.  So, the question here is, how can we as open-source enthusiasts be mobile? How can we translate our experiences in the open-source world into the types of work that we might find ourselves doing day to day?  Whether it be at a new job, wearing a new hat, or in some new capacity?  And the first pointer that I would put down here is the idea of asking questions.  Here are a few that I'll throw out: how will it work?  Have we ever done this before?  What do we think could go wrong?  What went wrong last time we tried to do this?  And, conversely, what went right?  Understanding whether scenarios have been tested before, and where ideas are coming from, is a really critical part of getting to that.  How do we think it will work?  And I can say from my admittedly limited experience, compared to those who are much older and wiser than me, that the first conception of how any job, or any scenario, or any project is going to work is almost always completely wrong.  But by asking yourself, and asking the people around you, 'what do we think could actually go wrong in this scenario?', that's where we kind of start to elucidate some of the unknown- some of the potential possibilities, and think about how the diverse range of experience that we, and the people around us, bring to the table, which might be used to either solve for those unknowns or to get around them entirely.  Keeping your options open is a really critical thing here.  And understanding what went wrong, and what went right, when these sorts of things were tried before becomes more important there, because it allows you to sit down and run some of those calculations in your head - understand what the possible failure states are, but also to have it in the back of your head that even if it's unlikely, the scenario where it's all gone wrong before might be the one that's actually right this time.  One of the, sort of, tenets that I have learned in the world of open-source software, which I have found really useful heading for a career that has not been in open-source, is the idea that in everything we do, we need just enough process to support people to actually get things done.  And this is something that I've seen - because, in commercial environments, you find that there's a good mix of scenarios where there's way too much process - which is probably the more common situation in big tech companies - and scenarios where there's not really any process at all, or there's not enough, or it's not well-structured. In the open source world, it's more often the latter, but I have seen quite a few open-source projects get this balance right. And from that, there are some more questions that we can ask ourselves.  Then we're talking about things like, which processes do we absolutely need?  If you've been around open-source software for any significant amount of time, that's something which is going to become really easily apparent to you when you get into a commercial environment.  Open-source in general is far, far less bloaty in terms of the processes which are required for people to get things done.  And then you've got to kind of think about, if you have processes which are super bloaty, which aspects of those are important?  You do want to try to build processes in such a way that avoids the single point of failure.  Which brings me to probably the other important question here of 'what are the constraints that we're dealing with?'  If you have single points of failure, whether they be single points of failure in the people sense, or single points of failure in the tech sense, that's something that you should probably generally try to solve for fairly quickly.  The situation where you have a single point of failure that's a person is the death of the vast majority of open-source projects and communities, because one person can only carry a scenario on their shoulders for so long before they simply fold under the weight of it.  And then we can look at some really extreme scenarios, which are generally going to require some degree of adaptation from everyone around them.  And these sort of broadly, again, break down into that situation of, you have a lot of unnecessary process, or you have absolutely no process at all.  But we can look at scenarios where you have all the money in the world, and the choices that you make are not constrained by monetary factors, but they might still be constrained by other things, as compared to the situation that we deal with far more often in open-source, where you are running on a budget of whatever change you can shake loose out of the back of the, ah, original maintainer's bank account.  Ask me about that one, because I've definitely been there before.  And so part of the trick is, if you've been in that sort of situation, where you're running things on a shoestring budget in the open-source world, what does that then teach you about time-to-money constraints?  Because there are scenarios when people have deep experience with an open-source tool, where using open-source tooling is going to be the right way to deal with the scenario.  But there are other situations where you don't have that same deep experience and you have all of the money that you could ever want, where it makes more sense just to throw money at the problem rather than people.  And that's the difficulty sometimes in translating that experience into a commercial environment.  All of us here are open-source enthusiasts, but when we're dealing with business requirements, the lessons that we need to apply sometimes aren't the ones that we might necessarily want to.  And again, open-source conference, so I'm sorry that I'm saying that, but it's very much the art there of understanding the trade-offs.  The other real problem is when you walk into a scenario and you've got all of this experience in open-source projects and people just laugh at you about it.  You know ,why would we care that you have experience in an open-source project?  Because the what- the type of work that we're doing here bears absolutely no relevance to this whatsoever.  And that can be where the mindset aspect of this really comes in.  Because if you're in that sort of scenario, where you have an uphill battle to prove to people that you actually know what you're talking about, it really becomes about translating that experience in a way that they can understand.  And when people don't listen to each other, you tend to end up with process-induced failure scenarios.  And there are some beautiful examples of this out there.  There are actually quite a lot of examples of process-, or lack of process, induced failures in open-source communities.  But we can pull from even things like code, Codes of Conduct, can be really critical to keep open-source spaces running in a way where everyone has those sorts of terms set.  And so, again, it becomes about building exactly the right amount of process to make sure that people are working together and can produce something functional.  And the lessons from open-source communities can often be really valuable in that, like the importance of setting ground rules with the people you're working with.  I mean, if you're dealing with a scenario where people on the team don't respect each other, or people on the team aren't showing each other respect that is owed, or you've got people who are being actively antagonistic to each other, some of those tools that you learn in open-source spaces and open-source communities can be really valuable there.  And those sorts of things can be how you prove the worth of open-source in scenarios where open-source isn't valued.  It takes a lot of time.  It takes a lot of unpicking.  But it's something that you can get to.  So, with all of this information, when we walk into a new job, how do we do this?  How do we shift the mindsets of the people around us using the lessons that we've taken from open-source projects and open-source communities?  How do we drive wider adoption of open-source across businesses in cases where it's appropriate, and how do we identify when it's appropriate and when it's not?  I sort of have a shtick that pretty much every time I talk about this stuff - and I did it at SeaGL last year, and I do it in the talk which I give the most often at conferences - I talk about the one line.  'Who's not in the room, and why aren't they here?'  And that one line can be applied to a whole lot of different scenarios, but it is also one that can be applied to the scenario of walking into a new job and working out the types of constraints that you're going to be dealing with, and what you might need to do to overcome some of the difficulties that you're going to end up dealing with.  Your previous experiences, whether they be in the world of open-source, whether they be in the world of commercial tech, or whether they be not in tech at all, all helped you build transferable skills to some degree.  And those transferable skills will be different.  If you're coming from open-source, you've probably learned a lot about dealing with people. You've learned a lot about managing communities.  You've learned a lot about making sure that a group of people with sometimes disparate backgrounds and interests can all work together for a common goal.  If you've come from other industries, you might have learned a lot about caring and nurturing.  You might have learned a lot about crunch.  You might have learned a lot about how to deal with money.  Erm, if you have spent quite a long time as a stay-at-home parent, you will have people skills which can be the absolute envy of people who have spent their entire lives in business and never dealt with a child - and I say that as someone who has no children myself.  The people who do this really well want rooms full of different people and different perspectives.  So if you find yourself walking into a space where you feel intimidated, or if you find yourself walking into a space where you're on- where you're wondering 'why are they bringing open-source experience in here?  Why are they bringing me in here with my previous experience not being in tech?', the answer to that is often that there's something in your perspective that they want or need, even if they don't know it yet.  And so the crucial thing is about understanding what those trade-offs are, and understanding how to communicate the trade-offs to people in a way which will help you come to an agreeable compromise.  No functioning team full of people; whether that be in the IT industry in a paid job, whether it be in the world of open-source communities, or whether it be a group of people who are putting on a theatre production; no group of people agrees on things all the time.  There will always be conflict.  There will always be decision points.  There will always be things that you need to discuss, and argue, and break down.  And the best teams are the ones that find the compromises.  When you have a bunch of people with different perspectives, with different life experiences, with different values in a room, sometimes it really is about the art of a compromise.  If you're someone who's spent a lot of time not working in the IT industry, and you're just coming into the industry, you'll bring a perspective where you might- you might find yourself compromising more often, but you'll generally be able to slowly shift those decisions in the right direction.  And it's going to be very similar if you're coming from a background where you have heavy experience in open-source and you're walking into a scenario where you're the only one with that background.  At first, you might find yourself doing a hell of a lot of compromising.  But eventually, the aim is that it gets you to better decisions.  It gets you to a better end point.  Being mobile, and being willing to compromise, is a really crucial thing.  And that is how we can bring a lot of the values and a lot of the benefits of open-source communities to the business world - to worlds where people don't need it, or don't think they need it, or don't know that they need it yet.  And that is why it is really crucial, when you are getting ready for your new job, not just to think about they want, but to take the totality of all of your experience and think about 'what can I bring to the table here that nobody has yet?'

We will now, I believe, have a little bit of time for questions, so I will be on the stream to answer those.  Otherwise, my contact details are up there, I'll be around for the rest of the conference, you should be able to find me - I'm pretty visible on the internet if you ever want to get in contact with me.  And thank you all for having me!

NOMAD: That was a very interesting talk, and it spurred a lot of questions!  So I'm going to jump right in. - a, the very first one: TheyOfHIShirts says- or asks: 'By "process", in terms of too much or not enough, are you talking about the set of instructions needed to theoretically achieve the desired results?'

LIVE DAWN - a, I'm talking about two things there: the first one is the set of instructions required to achieve the desired result, and the second one is the constraints that are required to keep people on target.  And both of those are important in setting the structure, and it's- one thing that I find is that in- or, one thing that I find, or that I've seen is that in the commercial world, often, there is too much structure, and that structure gets to the point where it actually stops you from getting things done because it creates roadblocks; and in the open source world, there's much more often not enough structure, and that gives you problems because you're having to solve problems and deal with things on the fly.  So, bringing those two opposing perspectives together - the business into the world of open-source, the open-source into the world of business - can sometimes give you a better balance, and help you find that 'just enough' process.

NOMAD: Wilco, ah, follows up that question with 'Is there a specific role whose job it should be to dial in that process knob when it needs more or less?'

DAWN: Everyone should be able to do it, but it should be primarily the job of managers.

NOMAD: Okay.

DAWN: For- eh, for wherev- for whatever the form of 'manager' or 'facilitator' looks like for you, your work environment, and your team; or for whatever the form of 'project manager', 'project facilitator',  'primary maintainer' looks like in the open-source world; that's who should have primary responsibility for dialing in the process, but everyone should be able to think about it, and bring ideas to the table.

NOMAD: A good project manager-

DAWN: And in fact- the value of, the value of that 'who's not in the room and why aren't they here?' question is often that when you get people with different perspectives, project managers don't know everything.  Project managers don't have the entire world perspective at their feet, and so often it's suggestions from people who have a different perspective to the project manager that can shift the conversations about the types of process that are needed.

NOMAD: I've- I've, ah, had the lucky circumstance of discovering that a good project manager is worth more than their weight in gold.

DAWN: Oh yeah.  Yeah.  Absolutely.

NOMAD: idasuperman? - ah, I'm sure I'm mangling that - asks 'It seems it's getting (more and more) difficult to get in contact with maintainers of various high level projects.  Do you see some backlash on contacting people in recent years?  A lot of people are not checking email anymore.  Open-source projects like the Linux kernel, Chrome, or Firefox seem to be getting "too big to help".  Comments?'

DAWN: Mmm.  I think- this one was sort of interesting, because there's a bit that I had to cut from this talk for time, around when you have that trade-off of 'do you use open-source or not?', one of the options with the 'throw the money at things' option, is actually: you throw the money at an open-source project, but you throw the money at the maintainers, or you throw the money at a managed variety of an open-source project, which takes some of the- eh, erm, and one of the classic examples here is a cloud-hosted version of Kubernetes.  It takes some of the overhead off you, because you don't have to worry about managing the core infrastructure.  But it still means that you get the flexibility that's inherent with open-source software, where you can actually trawl through it line-by-line, and make modifications if you want to.  And I think it becomes a very interesting- there's a very interesting conversation in that question around- in that question around things becoming 'too big to help', in that one of the ways that we can shift the conversation about things being 'too big to help' is,  actually, throw money at managed versions of open-source projects.  Throw money at maintainers of open-source projects.  Sometimes the goal should not be to hire three people to maintain your Kubernetes cluster bare-metal, it should be to throw as much money as you can at the overhead of that, and then maybe you only have to hire one or two people to manage your Kubernetes cluster.

NOMAD: Foundations can be good for this as well.

DAWN: Obviously- yeah.  Yeah.  The numbers are way off here, but i- if you want to free up maintainers to do- eh, it's kind of tangential to where I was trying to get to in terms of our experience, but if you free up- if you, as the person making these decisions, can encourage a scenario which frees up maintainers to actually improve their product, that helps to reduce the bottlenecks of 'too big to help'.

NOMAD: So, going back to wilco, erm: 'When there is a tool that you can get off the shelf, how do you know if you should use that, as opposed to build something in-house that does the same thing?'

DAWN: Well, there are sort of three decision points here: there's the take the purely commercial tool; go and find something open-source that someone has built; or reinvent it yourself.  And- it- a lot of that - that- that's a really interesting one, because i-nthere's a bit there about cultivating the open-source ethos wherever you end up, and that becomes about things like contributing back, but that only works if you're using projects which encourage contributions back, and support it from people.  And I have the rather unique experience here of having made the terrible decision of maintaining an open-source project for the writing community, most of whom don't understand the first thing about tech.  And what supporting people to contribute back looks like there is very different to what it looks like in the tech world.  So, when you get the choice of 'find something that someone else has built', 'throw the money at a commercial solution', or 'build it yourself', look for the ones where- look for whatever the solution is where you're going to be able to feed back, where you're going to be able to get input back in, and where people actually care about the- ki- people actually care about whether the tool that they're using is going to be helpful.  People actually care about the future of the tool and maintaining it, whatever that may look like.  And I know it's sacrilegious to say this at an open-source conference, but there will be scnearios where the correct answer to that is throw the money at the commercial product.  Because given a choice- i- in a work environment, it becomes a very different equation when you're given a choice between 'throw the money at the commercial product that has a clear roadmap and a clear history of success', or 'throw the money at the op- throw the money at people to maintain the open-source product where every bugfix that people put in gets stonewalled'.

NOMAD: We have a little bit-

DAWN: And there's also discussions about forking and things that come off that.

NOMAD: Mmm.  We have just a little bit of time left, so I'm going to ask a last question; may not have time to finish it.  'How does one learn what they need in orde- need to do, need to in order to dial in the process knob if they want to help in that way, but don't know whether there is too much or too little process?'

DAWN: Think about the things that stop you from getting work done.  Are you finding that the things that stop you from getting work done are all intrinsic, so they're problems that you're having in being able to find the tools that you need?  Or are they all extringic- they all extrinsic, in that you build something and then you get told 'no, we've got some other problem with that', or you get to the point where you need a software license for something, and the pers- you know, the procurement person is nowhere to be found.  If the problems are generally extrinsic, there's probably too much process; if the problems are generally intrinsic, in that, like, you can't find the tool that you need the software license for in the first place, that probably means you don't have enough.

NOMAD: Alright, well, thank you very much!  We've gone just a smidge over time, so I'm going to wrap up really quickly, reminding everyone that TeaGL is starting in a few minutes, after which we have Firefox: Multi-Account Containers, and Choose Your Candidate: Options for OSS Project Election.  I would like to again thank our sponsors, and especially thanks to Dawn for giving this very interesting talk.  Have a good afternoon, everybody.

DAWN: Thank you for having me.
